- [Print] 
- Share
- [Facebook] 
- [Twitter] 

# Places of Interest

## Vishnupad

Gaya is located 100 kilometers away from the capital city of Patna. Historically, Gaya was the part of the ancient Magadh Empire. The city is located on the bank of Falgu River and is considered among one of the most sacred cities for Hindus. Three hills Mangala-Gauri, Shringa-Sthan, Ram-Shila and Brahmayoni surround it from three sides and make at a safe and beautiful site. Gaya is an ancient place and has great heritage and history. Various modes of transportation connect Gaya with other major cities of Bihar along with rest of India
Gaya is sacred not only for Hindus but also for Buddhists, as the place has many Buddhist pilgrim destinations. These sacred places in Gaya correspond to physical features, most of which occur naturally. The bank sides of river Falgu and temples located on the bank are beautiful and attractive. A peepal tree standing on the bank of Falgu River called Akshayavat is considered sacred for Hindus. The tree is worshiped for its divinity

The Mangla Gauri shrine who is believed to be the first wife of Lord Shiva is worshiped here. The two rounded stones that symbolize the breasts of the mythological Sati have been considered sacred among Hindus. The most attractive destination in Gaya is Vishnupad Temple. The temple is located on the bank of river Falgu River and has footprint of Vishnu incised into a block of basalt. People believe that Lord Vishnu killed Gayasur by placing his foot on Gayasur’s chest.
The old temple of Vishnupad was later renovated by the queen of Indore, Devi Ahilyabai in eighteenth century. While Hindus claim that footprints in Vishunpad temple are of Lord Vishnu, Buddhists consider them the footprints of Lord Buddha. The temple is nevertheless a major pilgrim destination.

Nomenclature of Gaya is based on the myth of demon Gayasur who Lord Vishnu had killed in a dual. The place is so sacred for Hindus that even Lord Ram had performed Pindadanam here for his ancestors. Legend says that Lord Ram had come to Gaya to pay homage to his ancestors and Sita had accompanied him on his way. Gaya is equally important for Buddhists as this was the place where Lord Buddha preached the Fire Sermon i.e. Adittapariyaya Sutta to around 1000 agriculture workers who were fire-worshipers. The influence of Buddha’s discourse was so enormous that all of them converted to Buddhism.

## Bodhgaya

Bodhgaya is one of the most important and sacred Buddhist pilgrimage center in the world. It was here under a banyan tree, the Bodhi Tree, Gautama attained supreme knowledge to become Buddha,the Enlightened One. Born; in the foothills of the Himalayas as a Sakya prince of Kapilvastu (now in Nepal), most of the major events of his life, like enlightenment and last sermon, happened in Bihar. Buddhism as a religion was really born in Bihar and evolved here through his preaching and the example of his lifestyle of great simplicity, renunciation and empathy for everything living. Significantly, the state’s name of ‘Bihar’ originated from ‘Vihara’ meaning monasteries which abounded in Bihar. Several centuries after Buddha’s passing away, the Maurya Emperor Ashoka (234-198 BC) contributed tremendously towards the revival, consolidation and spread of the original religion. It is the monasteries, Ashoka built for the Buddhist monks and the pillars known as Ashokan Pillars erected to commemorate innumerable historical sites associated with the Buddha’s life, mostly intact to this day, that helped scholars and pilgrims alike to trace the life events and preaching of a truly extraordinary man. There is a magnificent Mahabodhi temple and the Tree from the original sapling still stands in the temple premises. The temple is an architectural amalgamation of many centuries, cultures and heritages. While its architecture has a distinct stamp of the Gupta era, it has later ages inscriptions describing visits of pilgrims from Sri Lanka, Myanmar and China between 7th and 10th century AD. It is perhaps still the same temple Hieuen Tsang visited in 7th century.

### What to See :

Mahabodhi Temple: The temple stands in the east to the Bodhi Tree. Its architectural effect is superb. Its basement is 48 square feet and it rises in the form of a slender Pyramid till it reaches its neck, which is cylindrical in shape. The total height of the temple is 170 ft. and on the top of the temple are Chatras which symbolize sovereignty of religion. Four towers on its corners rise gracefully giving the holy structure a poise balance. This sacred edifice is like a grand banner unfurled by time to proclaim to the world the pious efforts of the Buddha to solve the knots of human miseries, to ascend above worldly problems and to attain transcendental peace through wisdom, good conduct and disciplined life.
nside the temple, in the main sanctum, there is a colossal image of the Buddha in sitting posture touching the earth by his right hand. In this posture the Buddha accomplished the supreme enlightenment. The statue is of black stone but it has been guilder by the devotees. The entire courtyard of the temple is studded with large number of votive stupas. These stupas are of all sizes built during the past 2500 years ago. Most of them are extremely elegant in structural beauty. The ancient railings, which surround the temple, are of the first century BC and are among the very interesting monuments of the century.

### Animesh Lochan Chaitya:

It is believed that the Buddha spent one week here looking towards the great Bodhi tree out of gratitude, without twinkling his eyes.

### Bodhi Tree:

The present Bodhi Tree is probably the fifth succession of the original tree under which the Buddha had attained enlightenment. Vajrasana, the seat of stability, is a stone platform on which the Buddha is supposed to have sat in meditation gazing east, under the Bodhi tree.

### Chankramana:

This marks the sacred spot of the Buddha’s meditative perambulations during the third week after pious enlightenment. It is believed that wherever the Buddha put his feet lotus sprang up.

### Ratnagarh:

The Buddha spent one week here, where it is believed that five colors came out of his body.
Other Treasures of Bodhgaya: 80 ft Statue of the Buddha, Lotus Tank, Buddha Kund, Rajayatana, Brahm Yoni, Chinese Temple & Monastery, Burmese Temple, Buddhist Monastery of Bhutan, International Buddhist House & Japanese Temple, Thai Temple & Monastery, Tibetan Monastery, Archaeological Museum. Sujata village (2 kms), Dungeshwari Hill (Prag bodhi) (22 kms by road), Maitraya Project (3 kms).

### 80 ft Statue of the Buddha –

The Great Buddha Statue popularly known as 80’ Buddha Statue was unveiled and consecrated on November 18, 1989 with a ceremony graced with the presence of His Holiness the XIV the Dalai Lama, who blessed the 25-meter statue. It was the first great Buddha statue built in the modern history of India. The statue is situated next to

### Mahabodhi Temple at Bodhgaya.

Visiting Hours: 7:00 AM to 12:00 AM, 02:00 PM to 06:00 PM

### Archaeological Museum –

Possess interesting selection of Buddhist and Hindu artifacts from Bodh Gaya and other nearby excavation sites. Museum is generally closed in Fridays.

### Thai Monastery

One of the oldest foreign monasteries built in the ornamental regal Thai architectural style. The grandeur of the exterior as well as the interior is utterly awe-inspiring. The temple reflects like a red and golden gem over a calm pool at the front patio. The splendid Buddha idol along with the mural paintings depicting Buddha’s life and some modern events like importance of planting trees painted in a stylized manner are utterly marvelous. It is situated next to Mahabodhi Temple at Bodhgaya.
Visiting Hours: 7:00 AM to 12:00 AM, 02:00 PM to 06:00 PM

### Sujata Garh / Sujata Village

This ancient stupa is believed to be the place where Gautama Siddhartha meditated following severe penance of fasting before he attained enlightenment. The legend goes as that a village lady, Sujata, offered a bowl of rice pudding when she saw meditating Gautama severely emaciated. Gautama accepted the offer and realized the futility of the self deprivation. After this incident He went to meditate under the Bodhi tree and was enlightened and became the Buddha. It is about 2 kms from Mahabodhi Temple at Bodhgaya.

### Dungeshwari Temple / Dungeshwari Hill

Gautama Siddhartha is believed to have meditated at this place for 6 years before he went to Bodhgaya for the final realization. Two small shrines are built to commemorate this phase of Buddha. A golden emaciated Buddha sculpture memorising the rigid penance is enshrined in one of the cave temples and a large (about 6’ tall) Buddha’s statue in the other. A Hindu goddess deity Dungeshwari is also placed inside the cave temple.

## Baba Koteshwarnath Temple

Baba Koteshwarnath Temple is situated in Village Main, Block Belaganj, District Gaya. The temple is situated on the confluence of the river Morhar & Dargha in Gaya, is famous for highly sacred Lord Shiva Temple. Located 90km south of Patna, Koteshwarnath temple is believed to have been build around 8th century AD.
Koteshwarnath temple’s sanctum is carved in a single piece of red stone and within it is installed a large sized Shivalinga with around 1,008 miniature Shivlingas around 1200 years back.
It says that Vanasur’s Main & DevKund was situated in a deep forest. Usha used to visit the temple to offer prayers during which Lord Shiva appeared & told her to establish a Sahashtra Linga to get her wish full filled. After that Usha established the Shiva Linga. In result of that Lord Shiva granted her wish and she got married with Aniruddha, grandson of Lord Krishna her husband with whom she went on to live her life.
The place is known as “Shiv Nagar” in ancient times. There is a reference that Sahastra Shiv Ling idol was established at the end of Dwapar Yuga. This Shiv Ling was established by Usha, daughter of King Vanasur of Sonitpur. It’s a belief that a pilgrimage to this place is powerful enough to full fill all the wishes and desires of the one who comes here. Quite Evidently, Every year In the month of Saawan devotees throng this temple to offer prayers.
It says that Vanasur’s Main & Dev Kund was situated in a deep forest. Usha used to visit the temple to offer prayers during which Lord Shiva appeared & told her to establish a Sahashtra Linga to get her wish full filled. After that Usha established the Shiva Linga. In result of that Lord Shiva granted her wish and she got married with Aniruddha, grandson of Lord Krishna her husband with whom she went on to live her life.
Usually all the holy places of Lord Shiva have large number of devotes coming all the year round but during the holy months of Saawan this increases. It is well connected through Pitch road from the sides of Makhdumpur, Shakurabad-Ghejan, Tekari and Bela Rampur.

### Architecture of Koteshwarnath Temple –

The temple is east facing. The main components of the temple are a Garbhagriha (sanctum), a stambh-mandap (pillared haal) and Mukhmandapa (frontal porch). The temple has a new Shikar (spine) recently constructed in the South Indian style popularly known as “Dravidian Style”. However its internal structures are still preserved in original by and large partial changes have been made in its Garbhagriha and Mukhmandapa. The temple is basically built in bricks and granite stones which is evident in it’s entrance, antral (vestibule) and pillared hall.

### Dungeshwari Temple / Dungeshwari Hill

Dungeshwari Cave Temples, also known as Mahakala caves, is situated 12 km north-east of Bodhgaya, Bihar. There are three caves containing Buddhist shrines, where the Buddha is believed to have meditated. Dungeshwari Cave Temples are the ancient caves. These are caves Lord Buddha underwent years of self-mortification before descending to Bodhgaya. Three main caves contain several shrines for Buddhists and one for Hindus. Dungeshwari cave temples are also popular as Sujata Sthan to local people. An interesting story is being famous on this temple. It is believed that when Buddha was doing his self-mortification, he became frail, feeble and starved. When he rested under a Banayan tree, a doomed village woman named Sujata offered him food. Buddha accepted her offerings and consumed the food, his explicit approval presented him with a divine truth that neither extreme self indulgence nor self-abasement is the right way to attain enlightenment. Buddha attained the knowledge that folow the middle path was require to attain the supreme nirvana. Sujata Sthan or Dungeshwari Temple stands as a symbol commemorating this event.

#### Importance of Dungeshwari Cave

Gautama Siddhartha is believed to have piously meditated at this place for six years before he went to Bodhgaya for the final realisation. Two small shrines are built to commemorate this phase of Buddha. A golden emaciated Buddha sculpture memorising the rigid penance is enshrined in one of the cave temples and a large (about 6’ tall) Buddha’s statue in the other. A Hindu goddess deity Dungeshwari is also placed inside the cave temple.

---

https://us.trip.com/travel-guide/destination/gaya-15228/
__
App
Customer Support
USD
Find Bookings
- [Hotels & Homes] 
- [Flights] 
- [Trains] 
- Car Services
- [Car Rentals] 
- [Airport Transfers] 
- [Attractions & Tours] 
- [Attractions & Tours] 
- [eSIM & SIM] 
- [Flight + Hotel] 
- [Cruises] 
- [Custom Trips] 
- [Travel Guides] 
- [Map] 
- [Trip.com Rewards] 
- [Deals] 
### Contact Us
- [Customer Support] 
- [Service Guarantee] 
- [More Service Info] 
### About
- [About Trip.com] 
- [News] 
- [Careers] 
- [Terms & Conditions] 
- [Privacy Statement] 
- [Do Not Sell My Personal Information] 
- [About Trip.com Group] 
### Other Services
- [Investor Relations] 
- [Trip.com Rewards] 
- [Affiliate Program] 
- [List Your Property] 
- [All Hotels] 
- [Become a Supplier] 
- [Security] 
Payment Methods
Our Partners
Copyright © 2025 Trip.com Travel Singapore Pte. Ltd. All rights reserved
Site Operator: Trip.com Travel Singapore Pte. Ltd.

---

![] 

# Discover Gaya's Spiritual Oasis with Buddhist Circuit Train \| Find best places to visit in Gaya

IRCTC offers an exciting tour package covering all the [**best places to visit in Gaya**]! While soaking in the teachings of Buddha in the peaceful surroundings of his presence, cherish a journey that leaves memories of a lifetime and life-changing experiences of self-introspection! Let us dive into what this journey has to offer!

**_Begin Your Journey in Delhi_**

A typical Delhi experience is all about intrigue, excitement, and sensory overload but hang on, and remind yourself of where you’re headed! Initially, it may appear a far cry from the peace, calm, and tranquillity but, this seemingly ordinary train ride, is already on the path that led Buddha to enlightenment. You board the IRCTC Buddhist Circuit Tourist train leaving Delhi behind, already inspired by the thoughts of achieving your inner peace.

**_Gaya Tourism Packages: Explore the spirit of Gaya_**

The IRCTC Buddhist package includes an eight-day tour to different destinations related to Buddhism. From Gaya to Sravasti, there are many interesting places that you will get to witness here. Here are some highlights of the IRCTC Buddhist Circuit Tourist train tour:

_The Mahabodhi Temple_

The first attraction everyone should see is the Mahabodhi Temple, one of the [**top Buddhist places to visit**], and a UNESCO World Heritage Site. This temple is where Siddhartha Gautama was enlightened and became the Buddha. The Bodhi Tree, under which he meditated, continues the symbol of enlightenment. The light and cool atmosphere around this place helps find peace inside you.

**_Top Buddhist Places to Visit Beyond Gaya_**

_Rajgir_

Rajgir, a part of the Magadha Empire, is an important part of this Buddhist Circuit journey. Visit the Gridhakuta Hill where Buddha delivered insightful speeches to his disciples. The Venuvana Monastery, gifted to Buddha by King Bimbisara also holds a place in Rajgir’s significance.

_Nalanda_

Home to the renowned Nalanda University, this place displays the ruins of the university, classrooms, and monasteries where you can witness the intellectual legacy it holds. The Nalanda Archaeological Site, with its fascinating excavations, and the newly established Nalanda International University serve as tributes to the ancient grandeur of this educational hub.

_Sarnath_

Sarnath, located in Uttar Pradesh, is an essential destination often included in **Gaya tourism**. Here the Buddha delivered his first sermon after attaining enlightenment. The Dhamekh Stupa, Ashokan Pillar, Mulgandha Kuti Vihar, and the Sarnath Museum provide profound insights into the Buddha's teachings and the early days of Buddhism.

_Kushinagar_

Kushinagar is the site where the Buddha attained Parinirvana. Key attractions here include the Parinirvan Stupa and Temple, the Rambhar Stupa and the Mata Kutir temple. These sacred sites offer pilgrims a space for reflection and connection with the final moments of the Buddha's journey.

_Lumbini_

Lumbini, located in Nepal, is revered as the birthplace of the Buddha. Pilgrims can visit the Ashokan Pillar and the Maya Devi Temple. This site provides a deep connection to the origins of the Buddha's spiritual path.

_Sravasti_

In Sravasti, visit the Jetavana Monastery, Pakki Kutti, and Sahet Mahet. According to legend, the Buddha spent 24 Chaturmasyas (rainy seasons) here. The surroundings give a colourful picture of Buddhist teachings and traditions.

**_Experience the luxury while enjoying the Gaya Tourism_**

The IRCTC Buddhist Circuit Tourist Train offers various packages to visit the **best places to visit in Gaya** and other destinations linked to Buddhist religion that easily suit different budgets ensuring a comfortable journey. The train features luxurious rooms, dining options, spaces for introspection and meditation, and even a small library filled with spiritual books. These amenities are designed to enhance your spiritual exploration and provide a restful environment throughout the journey.

**_Gaya Tourism Places: Embrace Spirituality_**

Booking a ticket on the IRCTC Buddhist Circuit Train is an investment in your inner peace. This unique travel experience, which covers the top Buddhist pilgrimage sites, allows you to immerse yourself in the teachings of Lord Buddha. As you explore these sacred locations, you'll discover a deeper sense of wisdom and serenity that can transform your life.

**_Join us on This Unforgettable Expedition_**

If you are looking to take a break from your regular busy schedule and want to explore the inner you, this is your chance to get on this self-reflective journey. This unforgettable expedition of the Buddhist-related places and many [**Gaya tourism places**] promises to enrich your spirituality and provide a deeper understanding of Buddha's path to enlightenment. Book your ticket today and embark on a journey that offers both historical richness and profound inner peace.

Take this opportunity to reflect on your soul. Book now!

Disclaimer: All information provided on this website is in good faith. While we endeavor to keep the information up to date and correct, we suggest everyone refer to the official website [www.irctcbuddhisttrain.com] for updated packages and offers.

### FAQ

[Why must one visit Buddhist pilgrimage destinations?] 

Buddhist Pilgrimage Destinations allow you to expand your knowledge about Buddhism and also learn about the ascetic life of Lord Buddha.

[Can I customize my journey?] 

Yes. You can customize your journey on the Buddhist Circuit Tourist train.

[Is it possible to book a ticket from Delhi to Bodhgaya only?] 

No. The journey night's difference should be at least 3 nights.

[Is it easy to book tickets from the IRCTC Buddhist Circuit Tourist Train official website?] 

Yes. The user-friendly interface allows you to book tickets without any hassle.

[What are the major attractions in Kushinagar?] 

Parinirvan Stupa and Temple, the Rambhar Stupa, and the Mata Kutir temple.

[Is Nalanda University included in the IRCTC Buddhist Circuit tour packages?] 

Yes.

---


 
 
 Bodhgaya (20 KM from Gaya) 
 Bodhgaya is the “Place of Englightenment of Lord Buddha.” Tourist Attractions in Bodhgaya are Maha Bodhi Tree, Maha Bodhi Temple , Shaivite Monastery , Bodhgaya Museum and Jagannath Temple . 
 
 
 Patna (150 KM from Gaya) 
 Patna is the capital city of Bihar. Places to visit in Patna are Patna Sahib Gurudwara , Kumhrahar , Gol Ghar and Khuda Baksh Library . 
 
 Rajgir (80 KM from Gaya) 
 Rajgir is located in the Nalanda district of Bihar, India. It is located 74 kilometers from Bodhgaya, and 100 kilometers from Patna. Places to visit in Rajgir are Griddhakuta (Vulture’s Peak) , Bimbisar jail , Venuvana Kalandakanivapa , Cyclopean Wall , Rajgir Dance Festival , Pippala Cave and Vishwa Shanti Stupa . 
 
 
 Nalanda (120 KM from Gaya) 
 Nalanda is famous for its ancient Nalanda University. Now it is Nalanda University Archaeological Complex. Other places to visit in Nalanda are Xuan Zang Memorial Hall. 
 
 Varanasi (300 KM from Gaya) 
 Varanasi also famous as “Older than Oldest City of World”, “City of Lord Shiva”, “Oldest Living City of World” is known for rich cultural heritage unlikely to be found anywhere else. Some of the things you must explore here are Ghats , Temples , Silk Weaving Villages , Ashram &amp; Math , Cremation Grounds and narrow lanes. You can enjoy World famous Ganga Aarti at Dashashwamedh Ghat and Boat Ride in Ganges. 
 
 
 Allahabad (450 from Gaya) 
 Also called Prayagraj and Kumbh City is famous for Triveni Sangam of Ganga, Yamuna and Mythical Saraswati Rivers. Kumbh Mela held in Allahabd is among Intangible UNESCO World Heritage of Humanity. 
 
 
 


---

Wanderlog staff Updated • updated Mar 9, 2025 Many of us love traveling on the Wanderlog team, so naturally we’re always on the hunt to find the most popular spots anytime we travel somewhere new. With favorites like Mahabodhi Temple, Vishnupad Temple, and Maa Sarva Mangla Gauri Shakti Peeth Temple and more, get ready to experience the best places in Gaya. Why trust us We scoured through the internet and read through 27 reputable sites and blogs like Footloose Holidays and Club Mahindra. We gathered all the results in one place and ranked them by how many times they were mentioned so you know you're getting the best of the best. Just look for the "mentioned by" tags on each place. Curious about the sites we referenced? Visiting Gaya? See our Gaya Trip Planner. I'll never travel to Gaya without this trip planner again What users say about the app Slide 1 of 6 Love love love! ❤️ Planning travel has actually been fun instead of tedious because of this app. Exactly what I needed to plan a trip. I can’t imagine anyone not loving this app! Wanderlog makes planning a trip so effortless. Seriously, this app does it all! This site and app let me do all the planning for our 15 day trip in a little over 6 hours! I can’t recommend it enough! Amazing!! The organization this app provides has taken a huge weight off my shoulders. This is the crème de la crème of planning apps! Don’t think about it - just click download right this minute. Other best of categories in Gaya 4.7 (23773) • 4.8 (1036) • Buddhist temple Sights &amp; Landmarks Historical landmark Architectural Buildings Sacred &amp; Religious Sites The Mahabodhi Temple in Bodhgaya, also known as Buddha Gaya, holds great historical and religious significance as the place where Siddhartha Gautama attained Enlightenment under the sacred Mahabodhi Tree. The temple complex, dating back to the 3rd Century BC, is a major attraction for Buddhist pilgrims and tourists alike. The present Mahabodhi Tree is a descendant of the original tree taken to Sri Lanka in the 3rd Century BC. The Mahabodhi Temple Complex is one of the four holy sites related to the life of the Lord Buddha, and particularly to the attainment of Enlightenment. The first temple was built by Emperor Asoka in the 3rd century B.C., and the present temple dates from the 5th or 6th centuries. It is one of the earliest Buddhist temples built entirely in brick, still standing in India, from the late Gupta period. We visited the Mahabodhi Temple on 25-26 January 2025, and the experience was truly divine. The temple’s aura of peace and spirituality was mesmerizing, with monks chanting and devotees meditating under the sacred Bodhi Tree, where Buddha attained enlightenment. The intricate carvings, the Vajrasana (Diamond Throne), and the Lotus Pond added to the serene atmosphere.
Despite the crowd, the temple maintained a tranquil charm. The cool January weather made the visit even more pleasant. Highly recommended for anyone seeking peace, history, and spirituality.
⭐ Rating: 5/5 – A must-visit for enlightenment and tranquility! Dr. R — Google review One of the greatest historic temple of Budha. So peaceful and spiritual place to explore. When you get there you will experiencing the mental peace here 🤍🤍 Aryan K — Google review It is one of the UNESCO world Heritage Sites. It is one of the main temples of Buddhists. People from different parts of the world visit this place.
Point to remember- mobile phones or any other electronics are not allowed inside the premises. There is a locker facility which is free of cost where you can submit your items.
If you want to take a camera inside the temple then you have to take a ticket for that from the counter.
If you are going to visit this place then please give some time and sit somewhere and make your mind peace for some time.
Try to sit under the boddhi tree. Sumant K — Google review A very peaceful and spiritual place. Had a great experience visiting the Mahabodhi Temple. Sagar R — Google review Felt very happy to be there. One needs to go and spend a couple of hours and meditate there. Local guides don't have much to say, but they charge a lot of money. Must visit. Anuradha G — Google review Beautiful shrine with excellent vibes. Very well maintained too. Unfortunately, we were asked not to carry mobile phones inside, but we were surprised to see the chief priest himself helping overseas tourists to take close up shots of Buddha on their mobiles. So my photo is restricted to one taken from outside. Raghunathan K — Google review nice place…. mobiles, smart watches are not allowed… strict checking… locker facilities available in front gate with free of cost…no entry ticket… beware of scammers… dont buy leaves they are fake Srawan K — Google review 4.0 (1) • Vishnupad Temple is a highly revered Hindu temple located in Gaya, Bihar, and is considered one of the most important religious sites in India. Dedicated to Lord Vishnu, this temple attracts worshippers from all over the country, particularly during the pind-daan ceremony. It holds great significance and is a popular tourist attraction in Gaya, drawing visitors who seek spiritual experiences and cultural insights. Need a place to stay? Navigate forward to interact with the calendar and select a date. Press the question mark key to get the keyboard shortcuts for changing dates. Navigate backward to interact with the calendar and select a date. Press the question mark key to get the keyboard shortcuts for changing dates. Navigate forward to interact with the calendar and select a date. Press the question mark key to get the keyboard shortcuts for changing dates. Navigate backward to interact with the calendar and select a date. Press the question mark key to get the keyboard shortcuts for changing dates. Navigate forward to interact with the calendar and select a date. Press the question mark key to get the keyboard shortcuts for changing dates. Navigate backward to interact with the calendar and select a date. Press the question mark key to get the keyboard shortcuts for changing dates. 4.6 (5225) • 4.5 (46) • Hindu temple Sights &amp; Landmarks Points of Interest &amp; Landmarks Mangla Gauri Shakti Peeth, located in Gaya, is a significant Hindu temple dedicated to Goddess Sati. It is one of the 18 Maha Shakti Peethas and holds great religious importance. The temple attracts thousands of devotees during Navratri and is mentioned in various Hindu scriptures. The shrine features carved reliefs on its 15th-century shrines and towers, with two round stones representing the breasts of Sati. Maa Mangla Gauri Shakti Peeth. Is one of 18 Shakti Peeth of South Asia.
Very Powerful &amp; one we had darshan of maa we will be blessed with grace to be more auspicious things in one's life.
One need to climb minimum 40 steps to reach the temple premises. Then you'll find huge crowds.
We have ₹250/- per head special entry.
Inner sanctum is so divine &amp; filled with aura of auspicious aura.
We'll have only the chest part of maa.
Jai Maata Di Maa Sarva Mangla Gauri Shakti Peeth Temple in Gaya is one of the 18 Shakti Peeths, sacred sites in Hindu tradition dedicated to the Goddess. According to legend, these places are where parts of Goddess Sati’s body fell, making them highly significant for Shakti worshipers. The temple is dedicated to Goddess Gauri, a powerful form of the divine, and is especially visited by those seeking blessings for health, prosperity, and happiness.
The temple is not very well maintained surprisingly, given the number of people that visit. The garbh grih of the temple is very small, which can make the process of having darshan take long due to the high number of visitors, especially during festivals and auspicious days dedicated to Goddess Gauri.
The priests are very greedy and keep asking for more and more money. They are never satisfied with whatever you give them. If you give them 10 or 20, they look at you as if you have committed a crime. If you give 500, they keep asking for more. Anjali G — Google review I recently visited the Mangala Gowri Temple in Gaya, and my experience was a mix of both positives and negatives. The temple holds great religious significance and offers a serene spiritual ambiance for devotees. However, the heavy rush inside the temple made the visit somewhat challenging.
The management seems ill-prepared to handle the large crowds, and there is a lack of proper arrangements to assist visitors. For a smoother darshan, a special ticket priced at ₹250 is available, but it feels unfair that devotees have to pay extra to avoid long waits. Additionally, the behavior of some pandits was disappointing, as they demanded money for every ritual and offering, which detracted from the spiritual experience.
That being said, the overall atmosphere of the temple is still worth experiencing for its divine energy and cultural importance. Despite the challenges, the temple is well-maintained and clean. If you plan to visit, it’s advisable to go during less crowded hours and be mindful of unnecessary expenses.
While my overall experience was good, I hope the temple management addresses these issues to ensure a smoother and more fulfilling visit for devotees. Abhishek V — Google review Praanams. Spl entrance ₹.250/-. I u mind about ur timings buy tickets. It's a narrow entrance through which people enter for darshan and leave in the same way. Only few can have darshan at a time. So gets delayed more than u predict. Murugan G — Google review The temple itself was absolutely majestic, and we felt a very strong, auspicious presence of Mataji — it was truly divine and peaceful. However, the experience was somewhat marred by the behavior of the pandit sitting near Mataji. He was extremely rude, shouting at the devotees, and was openly asking and begging for money. His behavior disrupted the serene and magical atmosphere that Mataji’s presence had created. It was disappointing to see such conduct in such a sacred place. SEVEN S — Google review Mangala Gauri temple in Gaya is among the eighteen Maha Shakti Peeth. (Ashtadasha Shakti Peetams), Which is located just 1 km away from Gaya Junction.
It is believed the breast portion of Sati Mata's body fell at this place. Here Shakti is worshipped in the form of a breast, a symbol of nourishment. An Akhand Deep is kept lit in side the temple. It is said that the highest blessings are received just by the Darshan of this Akhand Deep. It is believed that whoever comes to maa Durga with his wishes and prayers, returns with all of prayers and wishes come true.
Architecture of the temple:
This temple is built on a Bhasmakoot Parvat in the year 1459 CE. We have to climb up few steps to reach the temple. This steps route is in between houses of local people. At the starting steps route, there is the temple of Bhima and also Knee impression of Bhima. This place is also called as Bhimvedi Gaya as Bhima who is one of the Pancha Pandavas did Shraddha Karama.
The temple is facing East and Sanctum also has beautifully curved sculptures on the walls. Outside the courtyard is a place where Homas and Havans took place. The entrance to the sanctum is very small and we have to crouch to enter inside this temple.
Temple premises encompasses temples dedicated to Adi Deva Ganesh, Maa Kali, Shaktishali Hanuman and Lord Shiva. There is small mandap available in front of the temple.
Special Pooja's:
1. Mangala Gauri Pooja:
During Sravan month Every Tuesday, a special pooja takes place where women offer16 varieties of bangles and seven types of fruits with five sweets for prosperity of their families. This practice has been followed since antiquity at this temple.
2. Navaratri Pooja:
The another famous festivity of this shrine is Navaratri held in October/November month every year. During Navaratri time special pooja's, meditation and prayers performed here in this temple. Maha Ashtami of Navaratri there is a huge gathering of devotees.
3. Shivaratri:
Shivaratri also celebrates here as a big festival with Rituals and Pooja.
Temple Visiting hours:
Morning 05:00 to 13:00 hours.
Evening 16:00 to 20:00 hours. Surya K — Google review The Mangala Gauri Shakti Peeth is a significant Hindu temple located on Mangala Gauri Hill in Gaya, Bihar, dedicated to Goddess Shakti. This sacred temple is one of the 18 Shakti Peethas spread across India, believed to be the places where the body parts of Goddess Sati fell after her self-immolation. Specifically, it is said that the left breast of Goddess Sati fell at this site, making it a revered destination for devotees seeking the Goddess's blessings. Kishor S — Google review One of the 51 shahtipeeth. It's very holy and showers huge amount of energy. This place holds a very deep significance for the Sanatana. You may not make any idea of It's holiness until you visit the shaktipeeth. You can only experience it only by yourself when you will visit. If you are from any place around Gaya or patna.. or visiting Gaya then It should be a must in your list to visit this shaktipeeth to feel It's power. Saurabh Y — Google review 4.4 (585) • Brahmayoni Hill Temple, located in Gaya, is a sacred sanctuary with a fascinating legend. The natural stone opening in the hill represents Lord Brahma's female power. To reach the temple at the hilltop, visitors must climb 424 stone steps. The site also includes two caves and an ancient temple of Astabhujadevi. Surrounded by natural beauty, it offers a peaceful atmosphere and is less crowded, making it ideal for a visit with family and friends. Visiting this mountain was an unforgettable experience that left me in awe of nature's beauty. From the moment I arrived, I was captivated by the stunning views and the sense of tranquility that surrounded me. The air was crisp and refreshing, a perfect escape from the hustle and bustle of daily life.
The trails were well-marked and offered something for everyone, whether you’re a seasoned hiker or just looking for a leisurely walk. Along the way, I encountered breathtaking landscapes, from lush greenery to rocky terrains, and even some picturesque waterfalls. The panoramic views from the top were absolutely worth the climb—standing there, it felt like I was on top of the world.
The mountain also offers plenty of spots to rest, take photos, or simply soak in the natural beauty. For those who enjoy wildlife, there’s a chance to spot birds, small animals, and unique plant life, adding to the overall charm of the experience.
Facilities were well-organized, with parking areas, rest stops, and even small cafes or kiosks nearby for refreshments. If you’re planning to visit, I’d recommend wearing comfortable shoes, bringing water, and starting early to fully enjoy the day.
This mountain is not just a destination; it’s an experience. Whether you’re looking for adventure, peace, or a connection with nature, it has something special to offer. I left feeling rejuvenated and inspired, and I can’t wait to return and explore even more of what it has to offer.
Highly recommended for nature lovers, adventure seekers, and anyone in need of a breath of fresh air. It’s a place that truly stays with you long after you leave. 424 stairs to the peak. The view is good and windy at the top. The top has a temple of mata Savitri. Also midway it has a moorti of Maa Tara and Matriyoni cave. The stairs are bigger in size so you will need to catch your breath while climbing. Total height is around 1100ft. Worth visiting during monsoon if you are a nature and hiking enthusiast. The climb is not a difficult one. Ashish R — Google review If you are visiting peaceful place then you can visit brahmayoni hill
😊 Robin R — Google review BrahmaYoni Temple
Gaya is not about Vishnupad and Bodhgaya. There are many other gems and BrahmaYoni Hill is one of them.
It’s a very sacred place for Hindus as well as Buddhist.
Devotees who wish to visit this temple must go through a grueling climb of 424 high stone steps to reach the top of the hill, atop which lies this temple.
Two caves namely Brahmayoni and Matreoni are also situated on the hill along with an ancient temple of Astabhujadevi. Brahmayoni hill was the place where Buddha preached the fire-sermon to a thousand former fire worshipping ascetics and it is said that each ascetic became enlightened after hearing his teachings.
Don’t miss this place 🙏 Avinash K — Google review Very nice place, climb up hill not easy for old people Prasanta D — Google review Brahmayoni Hill is a sacred hill of Gaya.It is situated in southwest of Maa ManglaGauri temple.It is said that it had 400+ stairs.
I have visited Pretshila hill also.it is said that 676 stairs are in pretshilla but climbing on Brahmyoni hill is tough in comparison to Pretshilla hill because stairs of Brahmyoni are very steep at some places.
On way there is no arrangement of water.On top of hill also there is no arrangement of drinking water.
On top there is a temple of Maa Savitri and on near by another hill a temple of Lord Buddha is under construction.
Hill is full of greenery.At base of hill some shops of tea etc are running.I felt a urgent need of cleanness at the base and starting stairs of the hills
The population residing near hills are not carying for image of the place
People from very far far places specially from Bengal came to visit this hill and climb to visit Maa savitri temple.
Local administration should make arrangement of drinking water and basic amenities in mid way ,so that visitors climbing the hills can use in case of need. Janardan K — Google review Brahmayoni hill located in Madanpur near NH 83. A nice and pleasant place full of natural surroundings. Not much crowed and one can visit in morning time during rainy seasons. These days the green all round enhances the beaty of the place. A nice place to visit with families and friends. A more than 400 stairs to climb up and a nice view can be seen.
A good place for photography
Hindu temple on the top
A Buddhist temple Manjeet K — Google review Nice view in morning and evening to see gaya city from top of hill. Amar M — Google review 4.1 (21) • Gaya, located in the northeastern state of Bihar, is a sacred city situated next to the Falgu River. The area is famous for its 18th-century Vishnupad Mandir, a temple with an octagonal shrine by the riverside. Nearby, the ancient Mangla Gauri Temple sits atop a hilltop. To the north, visitors can witness Hindu devotees bathing in the Brahma Kund pond before paying respects to their ancestors at Pretshila Hill. I'll never travel to Gaya without this trip planner again 4.7 (3388) • 4.8 (532) • Buddhist temple Sights &amp; Landmarks Points of Interest &amp; Landmarks Bodhgaya Bodhi Tree is a significant site for Buddhists, believed to be a descendant of the original tree under which Buddha attained enlightenment. The area has been important to Buddhists since the formation of the Buddhist community. The current Bodhi tree outside the Mahabodhi temple is not the original, but a direct descendant. It has been replaced many times and is adorned with marigold flower strings during religious ceremonies. I have just returned from a 12 day tour of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. I am extremely grateful to have Fen from BODHITREE INDIA TRAVELS for planning, preparing and customising our itinerary and making it the best one possible. We were a group of 4 Family members travelling together. We travelled from Cochin-Munnar-Madurai-Periyar-Allepey- Cochin. We arrived in Cochin not knowing what to expect, but was overwhelmed and surprised by the excellent choice of hotels selected for us by Fen. On arrival in Cochin, we received a warm welcome from Fen, even though it was very early in the morning and he stayed in contact with me throughout our stay there, ensuring our well being and comfort.
A very special and heartfelt thanks goes out to our Driver Sajan. He really made our long journeys easy and comfortable with his smooth and safe driving. he was very cooperative in heeding to our needs and very knowledgeable about the local sightseeing and markets. he was professional and helpful to us all the way. Sajan became our translator, photographer and a friend all rolled into one and we were very sad to say goodbye to him on the last day. The Place for Every spiritual seeker.....it's dedicated to Bhagwan Buddha ..he got enlightenment here and spent the first 6 or 7 weeks here after enlightenment. DILIP P — Google review I’ve traveled all over Asia, and this temple is definitely one of my favorites. Sitting under the Bodhi tree is an incredible experience, especially for those who love to meditate. While I’m not really into “energy,” the atmosphere here - with thousands of monks from various traditions and the vibrant nature - feels truly special.
A quick tip: devices like smartphones, power banks, and tablets aren’t allowed inside the temple area. You can deposit your belongings for free, but be prepared to wait in line. My recommendation? Leave your phone at home to skip the hassle and stay fully present. It’s a distraction - free experience that’s absolutely beautiful.
One last thing - if you plan to visit and sit in the late afternoon, don’t forget mosquito repellent. Trust me, you’ll thank me later!
Highly recommended. Ruben — Google review Though not the original Bodhi Tree that the Buddha achieved enlightenment under, but the current tree is a descendant of the original tree. It is understandable cordoned off by fencing to protect it, but you can see it easily nonetheless.
Of all the places in the Mahabodhi Temple, this was the most surreal. You walk by this tree and are less than 2 meters from the place where Buddha sat and meditated before achieving enlightenment. It is an amazing and spiritual feeling.
This spot is usually very crowded with monks and laypeople alike, from all over the globe. But due to the spiritual nature of the place, everyone seemed to be on their best behavior. Despite all the people, it still felt incredibly peaceful, quiet, and serene.
This amazing place should be near the top of your list if you visit India. Gunnar C — Google review **"A Sacred and Transformative Experience at the Bodhi Tree"**
The Bodhi Tree in Bodh Gaya is an extraordinary place of spiritual significance and tranquility. Standing under the very tree where Lord Buddha attained enlightenment is a humbling and awe-inspiring experience.
The atmosphere around the tree is serene, with devotees from around the world meditating, chanting, and offering prayers. The Maha Bodhi Temple nearby adds to the sanctity of the site.
The energy of the place is truly special, and it’s a must-visit for anyone seeking peace, spirituality, or a deeper connection with history and culture. Spending time here felt like a moment of true reflection and inner calm. Amit K — Google review One of my favorite places in India is thé Mahabodhi temple or Bodhi tree Maryse D — Google review Very peaceful and clean place. No entry fees and no charges for storing phones &amp; shoes. Anyone can visit. Rich history and highly recommended. Abhishek K — Google review Recently, I visited the Bodhgaya temple in Gaya city. I traveled from Tatanagar to Gaya and finally reached Bodhgaya to visit the Mahabodhi temple, where Gautama Buddha attained enlightenment. It was a remarkable experience. I had the opportunity to see the Buddhist tree under which he sat and meditated. The serenity of the place was captivating, offering a perfect setting for finding inner peace. During my visit, I dedicated an hour to meditation, immersing myself in the tranquil ambiance. I was not alone in my pursuit of mental serenity; I encountered numerous tourists from diverse backgrounds, including the Philippines, Thailand, China, and Japan, all drawn to this place to meditate and explore their respective cultures.
One of the highlights was the 80-feet Buddha statue located nearby, which added to the spiritual aura of the surroundings. Overall, my experience was truly fulfilling, and I thoroughly enjoyed my time there. It provided me with an opportunity to disconnect from the chaos of daily life and connect with my inner self. Bodhgaya temple is a must-visit destination for anyone seeking mental peace, cultural enrichment, and spiritual growth. Suraj K — Google review 4.6 (2274) • 4.5 (194) • Buddhist temple Sights &amp; Landmarks Hindu temple Sacred &amp; Religious Sites Nestled in the heart of Bodh Gaya, Wat Thai Buddhagaya Temple is a stunning representation of Thai Buddhist architecture, constructed in 1956 to honor the 2500th Buddha Jayanti celebrations. This ornate monastery features a magnificent Buddha statue and showcases intricate designs that reflect the beauty of Thai religious art. Visitors are often captivated by its unique curved roofs and shimmering golden tiles that glisten under the sun. This temple, with its beautiful Thai-style design, is a peaceful place to visit. Though it is currently under construction, the serene surroundings and well-kept gardens still offer a calm atmosphere. It’s a good spot for a quiet walk or reflection, but some areas may not be accessible due to the ongoing work. Visiting during off-peak hours ensures a more peaceful experience. I recently visited Wat Thai Buddhagaya, a beautiful temple reflecting Thai culture through its intricate architecture and peaceful atmosphere. Nestled close to the Great Buddha Statue, the temple offers a calm space for meditation, but when I visited, there was ongoing construction work, which slightly affected the ambiance. Despite this, the charm of the golden Buddha statue inside the main hall and the serene gardens still made it a worthwhile experience. The temple operates from 7:00 AM to 6:00 PM daily, and entry is free. Sujit P — Google review At a distance of 700 m from Mahabodhi Temple, and 1 km from Bodh Gaya Bus Station, Wat Thai is a Thai monastery located in Bodhgaya, Bihar. Situated near Maya Sarovar, it is one of the exquisite monasteries in Bodh Gaya and among the must-visit places in Bodh Gaya.
Popularly known as Thai Monastery, Wat Thai Buddhagaya was established in 1956 by the government of Thailand on the request of the former Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru to strengthen the relationship between the two countries. The monastery was constructed with an idea of propagating the philosophies of Buddhism among the masses. It is the only Thai Temple in India. The place abounds with peace and serenity and is ideal for solace seekers and those looking for a break from the humdrum of city life.
Known for its exceptional architecture and stunning beauty, Wat Thai Bodhgaya is strikingly similar to the temples of Bangkok and is richly gilt and highly ornamental. It has a sloping roof covered with golden tiles. Considered as one of the most beautiful monasteries in Bodh Gaya, the sanctum of the temple houses a beautifully carved gigantic bronze statue of Lord Buddha. A 25 m high statue of Lord Buddha has been recently built in the garden near the Wat Thai Temple. One can also find several images relating to the life of Lord Buddha that have been carved with Buddhist scriptures.
Besides, Meditation classes are held in the morning and evening at Wat Thai. Every year in January, the monastery organizes retreats that are held in complete silence. More than a hundred people participate in the retreat and together they practice meditation and yoga here. There is also a guest house on the monastery premises for the convenience of pilgrims.
Timings: 6 AM - 7 PM
Entry: Free Alok S — Google review A very nice temple! Is a serene and beautiful temple that offers a peaceful environment for meditation and reflection following the Theravada Buddhist tradition of Thailand. Its stunning architecture and tranquil atmosphere make it a must-visit for visitors in Bodhgaya. Carlo C — Google review A very peaceful place to be in. It was great spiritual place. The people, monks and Nippon were so nice to all. Dr S — Google review Beautiful temple and very close to the main temple. A place that you should visit when you are in BodhGaya Van L — Google review The temple itself is actually very shut off to the public, at the time I visited you may only look inside from the stairs. So really not much to see or experience.
There is a restaurant run by the temple that uses all profits to fund a free health clinic for the local public. The cafe has tiny menu of food and drinks but is very quaint and cozy with interesting design. Has very relaxing and happy vibes. With delicious food and beverages. I am not sure why the cafe is not on Google Maps....maybe I am missing it lol
Definitely come enjoy this restaurant and say hi to Buddha on the way 😉.
There seems to be a large monastery grounds but to access you need to contact before visiting. Leaf L — Google review Beautiful monastery in Bodhgaya. No rules, you can go in with your phones, gadgets etc but only a small part of the monastery is accessible to you, most of it seemed to be off limits. They're doing a great job in terms of serving the society and philanthropy! Dr. G — Google review 4.3 (149) • 4.2 (53) • Buddhist temple Sights &amp; Landmarks Sacred &amp; Religious Sites Chinese Temple Bodh Gaya
This is situated near to the Mahabodhi Temple. 🙏 Sridhar A — Google review Beautiful Chinese Buddhist monastery. Very silent &amp; peaceful place.... well maintained monastery 🙏 Sourav S — Google review Chinese Temple in Bodh Gaya is a notable Buddhist monastery in Bodh Gaya and situated near to the Mahabodhi Temple. The monastery is built in the Chinese pagoda style having an attractive architecture. Well maintained and peaceful atmosphere.
It is very well maintained. Both neat and clean. Outside the sanctum, we have a statue of Kshitigarbha Bodhisatva. Beside the statue, there is a plaque explaining the significance of Kshitigarbha Bodhisatva. Harsha A — Google review Peaceful , clean and a very look alike like chinese temple, must visit Rapden S — Google review Very beautiful and neat and clean peaceful places, see God budhha statue. VICKY R — Google review Gorgeous temple 😍. Each and every statue is so beautiful. Enjoyed too much here, my recommendation for everyone to visit this place. Rohit P — Google review Mahabodhi Chinese temple. A beautiful and calm place situated near main mahabodhi temple. Infrastructure is good looking. Atul G — Google review Very Peaceful Temple
And very beautiful statue of Gautam Buddha
But I think very less people visit here only 4-5 people here when we visited Man V — Google review 4.1 (6678) • 3.5 (45) • River Nature &amp; Parks Bodies of Water Falgu River, located in Gaya, is a significant site for Hindu worship and spiritual experiences. The serene river attracts thousands of devotees who seek divine blessings at the Vishnupad Temple, which sits on its banks. Ritual bathing and peaceful boat rides are popular activities here, adding to the cultural and spiritual significance of the area. Legend has it that Rama and Sita rested on the sandy banks during their exile, further enhancing the river's mythological importance. The land of VISHNU...
This river almost always dry.
I used to live near falgu river on rent.me and my friends always come in the river and enjoy lot Jyotish K — Google review Nice river but lacks water for a short period of time but is pollution free which is a great matter in this era.. It has a historical as well as religious value in many ways..as .Ram had pandyad of his father Dashrath.... And also..Lord Vishnu had assasinated Gayasur at the bank of falgu...it's really a historical river...... SACHIN K — Google review Falgu river is also known as Phalgu river located in Gaya City of Bihar State. Phalgu river is one of the most sacred reivers of India. The Phalgu river originates from the confluence of the Lilajan and the Mohana rivers in the Chatra district of Jharkhand. Both Lilajan and Mohan are two large parent hill streams of Phalgu River. It flows for a distance of approximately 170 km
before joining the river Ganges near Patna.
We have visited this river during our visit to Bodh Gaya temple. This river remains dry throughout the year except for a few days during the rainy season. There is belief that river had been cursed by Goddess Sita as the River lied about the Goddess to Lord Rama. Sita Maa cursed this river as River was witnessed Pinda Dhan what Sita Maa gave to Dasharatha Maharaj, but Falgu river lied when Rama came and ask. Hence Sita Maa cursed this river as "you will be always dry". The river was believed to be one of the major and longest river go the country but after being cursed by the goddess, got dried up.
Interesting Facts about River Falgu:
1. The river holds immense significance in Hindu mythology as it is believed to be where Lord Vishnu defeated the demon Gayasura.
2. The river is important for Buddhists as well. It is on the banks of this river that Prince Siddhartha Gautama practiced asceticism before attaining enlightenment under the banyan tree, which is today known as Bodhi Vriksha. It is also believed that the Buddha bathed in the Phalgu river before attaining enlightenment.
3. There are eleven ghats on the western bank of the river dedicated to bathing and performing religious rituals. Surya K — Google review Nearby areas of this river is nice to go and spend time especially in summer evenings.Locals say that there used to be some villages in some areas where river is flowing but floods washed away all. It's a sacred river for the people here. Armaan A — Google review It is good you can buy groceries in this store for your needs Aryan S — Google review The Falgu river that flows past Gaya in Bihar is a sacred river.
There is reference to the city of Gaya and the Falgu in the Ramayana in which it says that Sita had cursed the Falgu River. There is an interesting story and the purana states that on account of this curse, the Falgu lost its water, and the river is simply a vast stretch of sand dunes.
It is the place where Rama, with Sita and Lakshman, came to offer pinddaan for their father, Dasharath, and continues to be a major Hindu pilgrimage site for the pind-daan rituals. Priya — Google review We Celebrate Chhat puja in Falgu river.Falgu is polluted river, it has not proper water. All people throw their wastage in Falgu. DESI S — Google review Legend has it that during their exile, Rama and Sita decided to rest for a while on the Falgu's sandy banks. When it was time for pind-daan, the offering of food to ancestors to enable them to have peace, Rama went to secure the necessary provisions while Sita waited on the banks. While he was still away, Rama's ancestors appeared in front of her and requested that the ceremony be conducted without delay. Rather than wait for the offerings of food, she performed the ceremony offering sand to the ancestors instead, thereby granting them salvation. Abhilash P — Google review 4.6 (1518) • 4.5 (40) • Buddhist temple Sights &amp; Landmarks Sacred &amp; Religious Sites The Metta Buddharam Temple, also known as the Silver Temple, is a stunning Thai temple located in Bodh Gaya. This magnificent structure features an outer shell made of stainless steel and adorned with decorative mosaic mirrors. One of its most striking features is the large white Buddha statue housed within a silver pagoda at the back of the temple. Unlike other temples in Bodh Gaya that use golden metallic colors, this temple stands out with its unique white metallic color scheme. This temple is a peaceful place with beautiful architecture. The intricate designs and calm surroundings make it great for meditation or just spending some quiet time. Everything is clean and well-kept, creating a soothing atmosphere. It's a lovely spot to visit if you’re looking for some peace and positivity. Absolutely mesmerizing! The peaceful aura and intricate architecture make this place truly special. The white Buddha statue is breathtaking, radiating serenity. It’s a perfect spot for self-reflection and capturing stunning photos. A must-visit for anyone seeking tranquility Children W — Google review I visited Metta Buddharam Temple in Bodhgaya, which is known for its serene environment. The temple is beautifully decorated, and the atmosphere is calm, making it ideal for meditation. I spent some time in silence, reflecting and absorbing the peaceful surroundings. It's a place that offers spiritual solace. Anjali G — Google review It is a beauty on its own.... The beautiful and unique theme of the place makes it more attractive.... Photography here is best ... Especially on cloudy days ... Just standing there made me feel as if I was in some fantasy world....
It provided me with peace and relaxation to my mind.... I just fell in love with this place.... It is great.... Each and every corner of this place is attractive.... It opens at 8 and closes by 5 or 6 in evening.... Top most beautiful place according to me in Bodhgaya.
Even the steps and the ground is beautifully designed... It literally made me feel as if I went to the place where immortals reside...
Its beautiful ....
.
Must go.... You can take your family there
.. safe for kids also....
A good photo should be taken here...
And above all its free... No tickets... Arya M — Google review Looks marvellous. The architecture is good even though the place is quite small is just before you visit Bodh Gaya. Suhas S — Google review The Metta Buddharam Temple is a Thai temple situated at Bodhgaya. The temple is appealing with an outer shell of stainless steel and a decorative mosaic using mirrors. The temple sees the Thai Temple style of architecture. The main temple floor is made of wood. Underneath the temple is the marble-floored meditation room offering a perfect environment to the devotees for meditation. The temple is decorated with numerous sculptures, which are handmade, from a mixture of white cement, clay, and epoxy.
People get mesmerized by the beauty of its distinct architecture and Lord Buddha statue. The lighting of the temple in the evening makes it stand out among many other temples. Alok S — Google review It's closed Sunday and Wednesday. When it's open, people can only access until the front Buddha statue. There was no access further into the bot (vihara). I recommend visiting the evening ,4PM David M — Google review Its a nice place to visit, the beauty of these places cannot be described in words, you must visit here and experience yourself the small details the artist has left for visitors to admire.
I am astonished by the amount of effort artists have put to create place like this.
FYI: Thirty minutes should be enough to see this place. Om P — Google review I'll never travel to Gaya without this trip planner again 4.2 (536) • 4.0 (40) • Archaeological museum Museums History Museums The Archaeological Museum Bodhgaya, located near the Mahabodhi Temple in Bihar, is a fascinating destination for history enthusiasts. Established in 1956, this museum boasts a remarkable collection of ancient artifacts and sculptures that offer insight into the rich cultural heritage of the region. Visitors can marvel at rare antiquities such as terracotta items, stone sculptures dating back to the 1st century, and precious metal idols depicting Hindu deities. There should be some strips or barricades around the placed items.
People used to touch them and scratch.
There is very basic ticket is required which nearly cost I think 10 or 20 rupees only .
It is very beautiful which have a lot of Buddha's statues of 9 century.
One should must visit.
The place is full of AC ventilated, I really like the place. Neatly laid out statues, artefacts in large halls. Adequately lit, displays are easy to view. Campus is large. Entry fee is limited to Rs 10 only for adults. Rush is limited early mornings. Timings are 9 am to 5 pm. Sanjiv S — Google review The Archaeological Museum in Bodhgaya, near the Mahabodhi Temple, is a hidden gem for history and culture lovers. For just ₹10, you can explore a collection of over 1,600 artifacts, with highlights like a massive Buddha statue at the entrance and ancient stone railings that once enclosed the sacred Bodhi Tree. The museum features Buddhist and Brahmanical sculptures from the Pala period and fascinating relics from nearby excavations, including pottery and terracotta from Sujatagarh. It’s a peaceful spot to dive into Bodhgaya’s rich heritage—definitely worth a visit! Sujit P — Google review A very interesting little museum that helps you understand the importance of the Mahabodi site. Some of the sculptures are captivating because they are so expressive. This museum is rarely visited, even though Indians would benefit from learning about the richness of their past. For just 10 rupees, you can travel back in time. Finally, the staff is welcoming. Jean-christophe V — Google review Museum like it's name here are some valuable and ancient sculptures of lord Buddha and many more different sculptures too. I must say one is always must. Thanks Abhitesh R — Google review Well maintained.staff sitting in their positions.but a few idols n monuments only.Not much worthy wht i felt.small museum.if u havent time to visit just skip. Jyotsna P — Google review On the auspicious day of international museum day I visited archeological survey museum Bodhgaya Bihar. !
It is a really nice place to study masterpiece images of Buddhist affiliation. I love to see the Main Hall which has kept sandstones and granite belonging to the Mahabodhi temple in Bodhgaya.
❤️🤗 Hello F — Google review The museum is somewhat hidden from the travelers with less or no awareness of many locals, shopkeepers.
The government museum has a fair collection of art found in Bihar.
We were conflicting instructions from 2 security persons based in two galleries regarding photography. We captured few but not sure whether it’s allowed or not. Better to check before you start taking photos.
The main entrance of the building leads to large hall where a large ancient hall has almost been put up. However, with very less documentation and no guide, it’s certainly has opportunities for improvement.
Restrooms are moderately clean.
Overall, good educative visit candidate for an hour or so. Rajarshi S — Google review 4.2 (108) • 4.4 (28) • Temporarily Closed Buddhist temple Sights &amp; Landmarks Sacred &amp; Religious Sites Located in the Pachhati locality of Bodhgaya, Bihar, the Burmese Monastery, also known as Burmese Vihara, is a popular destination for those seeking serenity and spiritual connection. This slice of Myanmar in Bodhgaya boasts distinctive Burmese architectural style and offers a peaceful retreat for visitors. The monastery is one of the many learning centers and shrines dedicated by Buddhist followers from around the world. Bodhgaya Bihar India tourism destination
The land of enlightenment of Buddha statue bodhgaya
Tour guide with all information 👍 Abhishek S — Google review Couldn’t go inside as it was closed due to covid but I must say that such an amazing architecture it is.
There are so many beautiful monasteries around the Mahabodhi temple and this one is one of them. Aniket A — Google review Tried to find this Place via Google maps, asked locals. However could not find it.
The photos given here and the location might not be the same. S T — Google review I have been here with my Myanmar friend. This place is comfortable and calm to stay. They provide typical Myanmar food, accomodation and can help you to visit the places in Bodhgaya. They don't charge for the visitors but you can donate money. Vishnumahanthy M — Google review BEING ONE OF THE FOUR HOLY PLACES ASSOCIATED WITH LORD BUDDHA BODH GAYA IS REPLATE WITH LEARNING CENTERS AND SHRINES/MONASTERIES DEDICATED BY VARIOUS BUDDHIST FOLLOWERS ACROSS THE GLOBE THE BURMESE MONASTRY ON THE GAYA ROAD IS A VERY POPULAR DESTINATION FOR MANY SCHOLARS AND STUDENTS I WENT THEIR WITH MY MATERNAL UNCLE,MOM, DAD YOU MUST VISIT THEIR ONCE WHEN YOU CAME TO BODHGAYA RANBIR N — Google review This location on Google maps is incorrect. Please search 'Myanmar Vihar' for the correct Google maps location. It's about 2 kilometres north from here. Sam D — Google review Estalished in 1980's this is a must visit for tourist coming from abroad to stay here at cheaper rate than outside hotels with safet,security and environment freindly and very nearby all amnetities. Every tourist want to get room to stay here to have peacefull stay. MØŤĮVĂŤƏ 2 — Google review A kyaung (Burmese: ဘုန်းကြီးကျောင်း; MLCTS: bhun:kyi: kyaung:, [pʰóʊɰ̃dʑí tɕáʊɰ̃]) is a monastery (vihara), comprising the domestic quarters and workplaces of Buddhist monks. Burmese kyaungs are sometimes also occupied by novice monks (samanera), lay attendants (kappiya), nuns, and young acolytes observing the five precepts (ဖိုးသူတော် phothudaw).
The kyaung has traditionally been the center of village life in Burma, serving as both the educational institution for children and a community center, especially for merit-making activities such as construction of buildings, offering of food to monks and celebration of Buddhist festivals, and observance of uposatha. Monasteries are not established by members of the sangha, but by laypersons who donate land or money to support the establishment.
Kyaungs are typically built of wood, meaning that few historical monasteries built before the 1800s are extant. Kyaungs exist in Myanmar (Burma), as well as in neighboring countries with Theravada Buddhist communities, including neighboring China (e.g., Dehong Dai and Jingpo Autonomous Prefecture). According to 2016 statistics published by the State Sangha Maha Nayaka Committee, Myanmar is home to 62,649 kyaungs and 4,106 nunneries.
The modern Burmese language term kyaung (ကျောင်း) descends from the Old Burmese word kloṅ (က္လောင်).The strong connection between religion and schooling is reflected by fact that the kyaung is the same word now used to refer to secular schools. Kyaung is also used to describe Christian churches, Hindu temples, and Chinese temples. Mosques are an exception, as they use the Hindi-derived word bali (ဗလီ).
Kyaung has also been borrowed into Tai languages, including into Shan as kyong (spelt ၵျွင်း or ၵျေႃင်း)and into Tai Nuea as zông2 (ᥓᥩᥒᥰ, rendered in Chinese as Chinese: 奘房).In pre-colonial times, the kyaung served as the primary source of education, providing nearly universal education for boys, representing the "bastion of civilization and knowledge" and "integral to the social fabric of pre-colonial Burma." The connections between kyaungs and education were reinforced by monastic examinations, which were first instituted in 1648 by King Thalun during the Taungoo Dynasty. Classical learning was transmitted through monasteries, which served as venues for Burmese students to pursue higher education and further social advancement in the royal administration after disrobing.Indeed, nearly all prominent historical figures such as Kinwun Mingyi U Kaung spent their formative years studying at monasteries.
Traditional monastic education first developed in the Pagan Kingdom, in tandem with the proliferation of Theravada Buddhism learning in the 1100s.The syllabus at kyaungs included the Burmese language, Pali grammar and Buddhist texts with a focus on discipline, morality and code of conduct (such as Mangala Sutta, Sigalovada Sutta, Dhammapada, and Jataka tales), prayers and elementary arithmetic. Influential monasteries held vast libraries of manuscripts and texts.The ubiquity of monastic education was attributed with the high literacy rate for Burmese Buddhist men.The 1901 Census of India found that 60.3% of Burmese Buddhist men over twenty were literate, as compared to 10% for British India as a whole... ASHARUL — Google review 4.6 (7636) • The Vishnupad Temple, located in Gaya, Bihar, India, is a significant Hindu sanctuary dating back to the 1700s. It is revered for housing a footprint believed to have been made by Lord Vishnu. This temple holds great importance in Hindu mythology and serves as the final destination for the ritual of Shraddha and Pind Daan. Architecture of the temple:
Vishnupad temple is located on banks of the Falgu River, marked by footprint of lord Vishnu known as Dharmasila. Inside Vishnu mandir, the 40 cm long foot print of Lord Vishnu is imprinted in solid rock and surround by a silver plated basin. The Construction date of temple is unknown. The present day structure was rebuilt by Devi Ahilya Bai Holkar in the year 1787.
The height of this temple is 30 meter and it has 8 rows beautifully carved pillars which support Pavilion. The temple is built of large gray granite blocks joined with iron clamps. The Octagonal shrine of Vishnupad temple faces east. The Pyramidal tower of the shrine is 100 meters tall. There is a slope in the temple with alternately indented and plain sections. All these plain sections are set at an angle to create a series of peaks at the top, joined. Krishnakant P — Google review I would appreciate it if you could address crowd control, maintain the spiritual atmosphere, and improve hygiene and cleanliness within the temples. Why do people crowd, solicit donations, and take whatever money or change is offered, making it seem more commercial than spiritual? I hope this will be taken to rectify this situation. Makam N — Google review 1. It is the main temple for Pind daan
2. Mobile phones are not allowed inside and they have locker in cheap to keep your cell phone
3. It's governed and controlled by registered panda of Gaya
4. Pind daan will happen in better way if you spend more money. So think about what do you want in the name of God.
5. Commute to the temple is not expensive from train station or other part of city
6. You may get all puja samagri outside of the temple, no need to buy beforehand
7. Again I am saying it's the main place of Pind Daan where money matters Mayukh C — Google review Vishnupad Temple in Gaya is an important religious spot dedicated to Lord Vishnu. It's located near the Falgu River and is famous for a footprint believed to be that of Lord Vishnu, which is carved into a stone inside the temple. The temple has a long history and is especially important for people who come to perform rituals for their ancestors. The temple is beautiful, with detailed carvings and impressive architecture. Many people visit not just for its religious significance, but also for the peaceful atmosphere. One thing to note is that mobile phones are not allowed inside the temple, and you'll need to deposit them in lockers outside. Overall, it’s a great place for those looking for blessings and to experience a piece of India’s spiritual heritage. Anjali G — Google review Vishnupad Temple, located in Gaya, Bihar, is a revered Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Vishnu. The temple’s centerpiece is a 40-cm footprint, believed to be Lord Vishnu’s, engraved in a basalt rock. The structure, built in the 18th century by Queen Ahilyabai Holkar of Indore, is an architectural marvel with intricate carvings and an octagonal sanctum. Seeing the importance and religious significance of this temple, government has decided to develop a corridor for this temple to make it world class temple.
The temple is significant for performing Pind Daan rituals, a sacred practice in Hinduism for honoring ancestors. Its serene ambiance, historical significance, and spiritual essence make it a must-visit for devotees and tourists alike. However, being a highly crowded place during Pitri paksh ( September), visitors should accordingly. Diwakar C — Google review Brahma Kadigina Paadamu
Brahmamu Taanenee Paadamu!
We all are so blessed to witness the auspicious padam of Sri Maha Vishnu at this age old mandir.
Very few Adobe 's of Vishnu will let pilgrims perform self seva &amp; Pooja.
This mandir is popular with rituals performed after life by their loved ones.
We need to bow to Maha Rani Ahalya Bhai Holkar for restoring the mandir &amp; preserving its tradition. Arjun K — Google review Vishnupad temple is located at @ 4 km away from City Bus Stand and Railway station. Gaya is located 100 km away from Patna City. We had been to Baidyanath temple and had Darshan in the Evening. After that we had dinner and booked bus to Patna. Reached to Patna in the morning @ 05:00 am and then booked one more bus to Gaya. Finally reached to Gaya in the morning @ 08:00 am. Booked hotel and got fresh up and then went to Vishnupad Gaya temple.
Gaya city located on the bank of Falgu River and is considered among most sacred cities of India and has great heritage and history. During the middle ages, the city was part of the Magadh Empire. Three hills, Mangal-Gauri, Shringa-Sthan, Ram-Shila covers the city on three sides.
It is believed that Lord Rama along with Maa Sita had visited this place.
Within the temple stands the immortal banyan tree Akshayvat where the final rituals for the dead takes place.
A special fair takes place in this temple in the month of Pitripaksha. Pitripaksha is a time when Hindus pay respect to their ancestors with Food and offerings.
Architecture of the temple:
Vishnupad temple is located on banks of the Falgu River, marked by footprint of lord Vishnu known as Dharmasila. Inside Vishnu mandir, the 40 cm long foot print of Lord Vishnu is imprinted in solid rock and surround by a silver plated basin. The Construction date of temple is unknown. The present day structure was rebuilt by Devi Ahilya Bai Holkar in the year 1787.
The height of this temple is 30 meter and it has 8 rows beautifully carved pillars which support Pavilion. The temple is built of large gray granite blocks joined with iron clamps. The Octagonal shrine of Vishnupad temple faces east. The Pyramidal tower of the shrine is 100 meters tall. There is a slope in the temple with alternately indented and plain sections. All these plain sections are set at an angle to create a series of peaks at the top, joined. Surya K — Google review Good temple less crowd and you can easily do puja (and darshan) here easily. Mobile phones are not allowed inside the temple premises and you have to submit it with 20rs fees in counter. Don't miss to go to falgu river near the temple it has good views. Beware of pandits inside the temple they are much fond of money. Lekha M — Google review 4.5 (1096) • Sita Kund is a sacred pond with great significance in Hindu mythology, believed to be the bathing spot of Sita, the wife of Lord Rama, during their exile. It is a popular pilgrimage site for Hindus seeking blessings for marital harmony and paying homage to Sita. Awesome experience.
Wandering within the breeze. One of my favourite places in Gaya. Several Temples are associated with the main temple. You can see the lotus feet of Sita Maiya ( Sita Maa) and the holy water source(kund). Hands of Dasharath ji, place where Shri Ramachandra gives pinda (work of last rites)
We visit here during Navaratri (1st day), on the pious occasion of Mahalaya.
My mother gives deep daan.(lamp ceremony)
U can collect 'Balu' (sand) of Falgu river. It is pure and can destroy any kind of negative activities like 'Pitri-Dosha'
Visit here once in lifetime, you will never regret about it Peaceful place, neat and clean. Devotees need to climb a small flight of steps. Wheel chair can be parked but specially abled person needs help to climb up. Arijit C — Google review The place &amp; vibe are just awesome in terms spiritually &amp; cultural activities. The place is peaceful &amp; delightful in morning &amp; evening time.. ✌️😊🌼🌅
Cleaning of sidewalks &amp; riverside is not satisfactory.. needs improvement &amp; dedication from local municipal authority. 😏😏😏 Shankar M — Google review Sita Kund is located in Gaya, Bihar, on the opposite side of the Vishnupad temple, across the Falgu River.
Sita Kund is an invaluable heritage from a cultural point of view. Sita Kund is associated with the Ramayana period, and it is believed that Sita Mata donated the body of her father-in-law, Dashrath like Pind Daan during pitru Paksha Naveen K — Google review This is the place where of visitamathu it's taken to a took that we can licy, a small gold over there about sita and the place a significant's more and yet goes ok experience Makam N — Google review Thare was story behind the temple.must visit .the lake view also soo beautiful ❤️ Jittujitendra # — Google review Loved the serenity of this place, very neat and clean and when there is breeze blowing over and around this place this itself becomes the "Jannat", very soothing place is the Sita Vatika.
It is a small garden to relax and spend some good time in nature's lap beside a hillock. It is very good fir health 😊 Pratyush A — Google review This is a ghat area which is used a lot during chath puja. It has few temples dedicated to Maa Sita. It’s constructed very well and maintained well as well. Provides a walking area upto Gaya ji dam / Maa sita setu. Ashish R — Google review 4.6 (469) • Tergar Monastery is a stunning Buddhist temple with an intricately adorned exterior, grand prayer halls, and sacred shrines. Located in Bodh Gaya, it stands out for its depictions of Bhutanese royalty and the revered Zhabdrung. The monastery offers a serene atmosphere for meditation and quiet contemplation, drawing visitors from around the world. Inside, the hall is adorned with images of Buddha in a tranquil setting conducive to religious study and discussion. Mingyur Rinpoche completed the construction of this monastery in 2007
A very active tibetan temple. In 2007,
I see hundreds of monks and novices going about their day outside. Around 3:00P.M. they were all called inside for puja.
Tuesday morning around 9:30 A.M : All the nuns were chanting inside the gompa. I am very lucky to decide to visit the monastery at the time I did. The temple is 10 mins walk from my hotel, I would regret if I didn't come. The entrance is on the side, not on the main front gate. I arrived around 8 am, they were having chanting ritual in the main hall with many young monks. Very blessed to witness the hall when it is fully lit during ritual. The light is turned off when there is no monk inside. So best time to visit if you want to see the monk students and temple when it feels alive is from 8-8:30 am and 4-5 pm (the monk said at this time you can witness longer chanting with more music instrument than the morning ritual) It wan special to witness the prayer and the music as I've never been to Tibetan temple before. It was also a joy to see many young monks as young as 6 years old on their monk school break. There is a small mini shop behind the main hall. I had conversation with 2 Nepalese monks about Tibetan monastery culture. I have learned a lot during almost 2 hours conversation. It was a true pleasure to start my day here. Best decision! If you come, take time to talk to the monks, you will learn a lot more. 🙏🏻 Namaste from Thailand Rainny P — Google review Just amazing experience , I can’t express in the words. Priyanshu K — Google review Beautiful Tibet temple. Should visit when you are in Bodhgaya Van L — Google review This monastery is located in Bihar, India. It's specially based on a Mahayana traditional. The Dalai Lama and some other famous monks visit and stay in this monastery when they come to pay homage to Bodhgaya. It's a big monastery and peaceful environment around. Bimalangkar — Google review This Monastery is huge, plus there are a lots of monk students Rapden S — Google review Tergar Monastery was hosting Kenting Tai Siti Rinpoche. Also during the tome of the 38e Kagyu Mönlam. What a beautiful event concluded by the Marme Mönlam. Pim W — Google review Beautiful and well maintained place.
The entire Bodh Gaya is dedicated to Buddha and the area is peaceful and all temples are nearby each other.
This one in specific is well maintained and beautifully decorated. Da D — Google review I'll never travel to Gaya without this trip planner again 4.4 (393) • Ramshila Hill, located in Bodh Gaya, is a picturesque destination offering breathtaking views of the surrounding area. According to local lore, it was visited by Lord Rama, Sita, and Lakshmana during their exile. The hill is steeped in historical and mythological significance, drawing pilgrims and nature lovers alike. You can see almost the entire Gaya from here. This place is near my house, ramshila is small hill and is amazing place to hike. You can go either via stairs or without stairs Mritunjay K — Google review One of my childhood memory. Felt happy to visit again.
A PROVERB famous in Gaya District, while I was in 10th, a year, which I spent at Gaya.
Itbis common say 😇 that once you enter Gaya region, you will feel, THE THREE CHARECTERISTICS OF GAYA.
'River Without Water.....
Mountain Without 🌳 Tree.....
Man Without 👨 Mind........'
But now Happy 😊 to announce that NOW
'MOUNTAIN ⛰ is With 🌳 ' Raghwendra K — Google review Beautiful mountain 🏔️🗻. There are approx 800 stairs to reach to the zenith of the mountain to go to the temple. It is really adventurous. Prince K — Google review I love this place. You can visit here you can see whole town from here Akash K — Google review Best place to visit , for simple trekking , and religious place for hindu. Hanuman mandir at the top of mountain. Rishav A — Google review Exciting place. You a take a view of all the city from here. Roamer R — Google review Nice place. You can do tracking as well. Abhyanand M — Google review 5.0 (14) • Bodhi Tree Farm (BTF) is situated near the Mahabodhi Temple, home to the sacred fig tree where Gautama Buddha attained enlightenment. This farm offers a serene environment and provides 100% pure and hygienic milk products. The staff is known for their excellent service and the dairy's white liquid is recommended for its superb taste and complete nutritional value. Very nice place for stay fit and healthy,Excellence behaviour or workers and staff makes a happy,the milk is having superb taste and full of complete diet,I suggest people of gaya to have the individual white colour liquid to stay healthy longer and increase immunity system Shivendra P — Google review 100% pure milk provided by this dairy farm with superb taste and hygienic condition. Ravi B — Google review It's such a good experience to buy their products KUMAR H — Google review Mangla Gauri Mandir Rd is a significant religious site in Gaya, known for being the location of the Mangla Gauri Temple, one of the 18 Maha Shakti Peethas. This temple draws in numerous worshippers daily and sees a large influx of devotees during Navratri. 4.4 (2541) • 4.0 (112) • Dharamshala Sights &amp; Landmarks Place of worship Religious destination Sacred &amp; Religious Sites Pind Daan Gaya is a revered site located on the banks of the Falgu River, where Hindu pilgrims partake in ancestral rituals to honor their departed ancestors. It is believed that conducting Pind Daan at this sacred location ensures the salvation of their souls. The customary practices involve offering pindas (ritual cakes) to the ancestors while reciting prayers and hymns. Gaya as we know happens to be the best place to conduct Hindu rituals for one's ancestors. We visited Gaya to perform annual shradh of my mother and performing pind-dan as posthumous ritual for departed soul of my parents and ancestors and on 10-11 Dec 2024. We spoke with Pandit Gautam Gayaav ji a month prior, in order to understand the types of rituals to be performed (as per our requirements) and the proper time to perform these rituals and accordingly, we booked a suitable date with him. We decided to stay for one night in Gaya and also perform all related poojas.
We were given one of the designated rooms on the ground floor . The room was good, with a wide mattress and a bed for sleeping. The room was well-maintained with attached bathroom.
After reaching Pandit ji’s place, he met us at our room and we discussed about the rituals which were to be conducted on the next day.Next day, we got up early and proceeded around 8 am by to a place dedicated for conducting rituals. The place has a lot of multiple structures constructed to conduct rituals and the tall trees and interspersed patches of grass, makes one feel that these rituals are being conducted in the midst of nature at the bank of river Falgu. The ritual went on for about 5 hours, we felt a sense of accomplishment paying obeisance to my parents and our ancestors. We were very thankful to Gautamji for all his efforts and for conducting the rituals to our satisfaction, and also for guiding us at key moments. The infrastructure should have been better. Devotees from all over India come here for pind-dan ritual. The pandas are just trying to gather money from the pilgrims by hook or by crook. Manab T — Google review The infrastructure is poor. The pandas and pandits involved in the pooja are loots. Beware of the broker pandas..they are real loots..please do not book in advance. It is advisable to come one day advance and see all the arrangements urself if you're coming here for pooja of more than a day. Chose the right pandit after meeting in person. See all the staying arrangements urself before finalising anything. The pooja is divine but the people involved in it are completely business minded. Its all test of patience. Krishna S — Google review Om namo Narayan. Try coming early. Place is amazing. Full of energy. Keep your belongings with you always. Maintain queue. Police arrangement is amazing, they help you a lot. Place is crowded like anything during Pitrupaksha. Crowd increases towards end of Pitrupaksha, so try visiting during early days. Indrasen S — Google review Holy place to do pinda daan to honor and pay respects to deceased ancestors. It involves offering rice balls (pindas) to the departed souls of our fore fathers at various holy sites in Gaya, Bihar, India, such as Vishnupad Temple and Akshay Vat (an ancient Raavi tree) Gangadhar K — Google review It was great and Auspicious pind daan pooja done by Panditji Satyam Barikji.
They have taken care of all of the things right from the boarding from railway station and accommodation.
Pind daan Pooja has been done with the pure spiritual vibes. Neha R — Google review I have visited Satyam Pandit ji for Pind daan in Gaya Ji.
It was an amazing experience.
He was stable calm and explained the entire process very very nicely.
Charges taken were also too good.
Maan ko santusti mili pooja kara kar. Shivani J — Google review Overcrowded and far too noisy. Pind daan should ideally be performed in a serene and silent atmosphere, which this place lacks. Add to it countless interferences during the proceedings by money hungry pandas who will pester you for information about the place of residence of your forefathers. Sugato M — Google review 3.9 (1704) • 4.5 (24) • Market Sights &amp; Landmarks Sacred &amp; Religious Sites The Tibetan Refugee Market, located near the Bodhi tree in Bodh Gaya, is a bustling area offering a wide array of trinkets, souvenirs, crafts, textiles, garments and other items. Visitors can find junk jewelry, clothing and books related to Lord Buddha's teachings. This market is a paradise for shopping enthusiasts and is conveniently situated just one kilometer from the Bodhgaya bus stand. The Tibetan Refugee Market in Bodh Gaya is a vibrant shopping destination renowned for its diverse range of Tibetan handicrafts, woolen garments, and souvenirs. Visitors can explore stalls offering traditional thangka paintings, prayer flags, jewelry, and woolen clothing such as jackets, sweaters, and shawls. ￼
The market is conveniently located opposite the Bodhgaya Bus Stand, on the northern side of the Mahabodhi Temple, making it easily accessible for tourists. ￼
Operating hours typically start around 8:00 or 9:00 AM and continue until 7:00 or 8:00 PM. The best time to visit is between November and March, when the weather is pleasant and coincides with the peak tourist season. ￼
Bargaining is a common practice here, and visitors are encouraged to negotiate prices to secure favorable deals. Purchasing items from the market supports the local Tibetan refugee community, aiding in the preservation of their cultural heritage. ￼
In addition to shopping, the market offers a cultural experience with opportunities to sample Tibetan cuisine from nearby food stalls, including delicacies like momos and thukpa. ￼
Overall, the Tibetan Refugee Market provides a unique blend of shopping and cultural immersion, making it a must-visit spot for those traveling to Bodh Gaya. Diwakar C — Google review Don’t ever come here, sellers are very aggressive, they beat my son and stomped on him when he was down and all ganged up at about 6 people stomping him at once. Only over a dustbin set fire by a cigarette. Don’t ever come here. They sell fake Tibetan Dzi and stones and will beat you. Don’t go here. Worst Tibetan market in the world. Tenzin L — Google review You can get lots of winter wear design here. Price is fixed which saves your time in bargain. Suraj B — Google review This is a nice place to see and buy winter clothes and I believe they also are of good quality. But it would be nice if they also sold souvenir or handicraft items. Om P — Google review Heard they beat up foreigners. Dont go here. 30 year olds sell fake rocks and scarfs and they are super agressive. They will scam you. They kicked a 18 year old kid to the ground for no reason. All fakes. Dont go foreigners and english. Tsewang S — Google review Simple market selling woolen garments at discounted rates. The area is pretty clean. Titli P — Google review Most stalls selling repetitive items of winter clothings and shawls as it's winter here in Dec. Price are fixed n no discount given. Not all stalls are by Tibetan as it's supposed to be refugees market(??) lots of Tibetan and Indian eateries outside market Message H — Google review Various type of devotional items,cloth,books,bag you can buy from here Abanti B — Google review I'll never travel to Gaya without this trip planner again 3.5 (5) • Sights &amp; Landmarks Points of Interest &amp; Landmarks Pretshila Rd, also known as "Ghost Rock," is a significant geological site with deep cultural and religious significance. Local traditions hold that this sacred rock possesses powerful properties for protecting against malevolent spirits. As a result, it attracts pilgrims and tourists seeking spiritual blessings and safeguarding. 3.9 (12537) • Gaya Junction serves as the gateway to the enchanting city of Gaya, renowned for its spiritual significance and historical landmarks. This bustling railway station is well-connected, receiving a steady flow of trains from major Indian cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, and Bengaluru. Notable services include the Howrah Rajdhani Express and Maha Bodhi Express among others. As you arrive at Gaya Junction, prepare to be greeted by stunning views framed by mountains that enhance your travel experience. Gaya Jn Railway station is in Gaya district making it an important railway station in the Indian state of Bihar. The station code of Gaya Jn is 'GAYA'. Zone - East central railway zone. Division - pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyaya. Gaya is the nearest rail head to Bodh Gaya and is only 13 km away. Rajendranath D — Google review Gaya Junction, is a major railway station located in Gaya, Bihar, India. It is well connected to major cities across India and serves as a crucial junction that connects Kolkata and New Delhi route.
The station is also connected to Patna, Jehanabad, Biharsharif, Rajgir, Nawada, Jasidih and Deoghar and other stations through daily passenger and express train services.
The railway station provide basic facilities of Parking, Food Stalls, and Cloak Room where passengers can store their respective luggage.
Gaya Junction plays a vital role in the transportation network of Bihar and is an important hub for both passenger and freight traffic.
Brief information about Gaya Junction Railway Station:
Station Code: GAYA
Number of Platforms: 10
Number of Halting Trains: 154
Number of Originating Trains: 39
Number of Terminating Trains: 37
Division: Pt. DD Upadhyay
Zone: ECR (East Central Railway)
City:- Gaya
State:- Bihar
Country:- India (भारत) Nirav J — Google review The station is clean and well-organized, but platforms 1B and 1C are currently under construction, making access challenging. Reaching platform 1C with heavy luggage was especially difficult, and unfortunately, our train was from there. Despite this, the announcements and other facilities are decent. It’s best to check platform details in advance to avoid inconvenience. Sayan C — Google review A decent sized railway station undergoing construction. Efforts can be made to make it much cleaner. You may see goods trains parked. Misbah A — Google review Gaya Junction has 10 platforms: 1 to 7, 1A, 1B &amp; one platform for pilgrim trains. It comes under East Central Railway Zone.
Amenities:
Stairs
Ramp for wheelchair &amp; trolley bags
Toilets
Waiting halls Sumit S — Google review _Gaya Junction Review_
_Overall Rating: 4/5_
Gaya Junction is a major railway station in the city of Gaya, Bihar, India. Here's a review of the station's facilities and services:
*Pros*
1. *Well-connected*: Gaya Junction is a major railway hub, connecting Gaya to various parts of the country.
2. *Cleanliness*: The station premises are generally clean, with regular maintenance and upkeep.
3. *Amenities*: Gaya Junction has basic amenities, including food stalls, water vending machines, and restrooms.
4. *Helpful staff*: Station staff are generally helpful and assist passengers with queries and concerns.
*Cons*
1. *Congested*: The station can get congested during peak hours, making it challenging for passengers to navigate.
2. *Limited facilities*: While Gaya Junction has basic amenities, it lacks more advanced facilities, such as Wi-Fi, charging points, and comfortable waiting areas.
3. *Parking challenges*: Parking can be a challenge, especially during peak hours.
*My Overall Reviews*
- "Gaya Junction is a convenient station, with regular trains connecting to major cities."
- "The station premises are clean, but the facilities are limited."
- "Station staff are helpful, but the congestion during peak hours can be challenging."
*Ratings Breakdown*
1. *Cleanliness*: 4.5/5
2. *Amenities*: 4/5
3. *Staff*: 4.2/5
4. *Facilities*: 3.5/5
5. *Overall Experience*: 4.2/5
*My Final Thoughts*
Gaya Junction is a convenient and well-connected railway station, but it lacks more advanced facilities and can get congested during peak hours. Baldev L — Google review Its going through renovation right now bt I hope it will be ok by then
- Too dirty station
- Too many homeless people
- Unsafe at night I D — Google review It's a pilgrimage city .As Important for Hindus and Buddhists. The construction work is going on for the renewal of the Gaya Junction. It make the station very huge and beautiful Sachiraj P — Google review 4.2 (2558) • International airport Airport Gaya International Airport, also known as Bodhgaya Airport, is a public airport located in Gaya, Bihar, India. The airport offers travelers a seamless experience with tight security measures and commendable cleanliness. Staff members are consistently helpful, enhancing the overall efficiency of airport operations. Spread over 954 acres, the airport terminal building can handle 250 departure and arrival passengers each. Clean and Clear Domestic Airport in Gaya, you can take direct flights from delhi to gaya. Good way to reach lord buddhas famous archeological places Small airport. Clean &amp; tidy and clearly contrasting with how other places are in the city.
Pleasant experience boarding the flight here. Indigo staff are courteous and great.
One can take direct flights after the pilgrimage to other metro cities without going back to other nearby airports/cities Gurumurthy A — Google review Need to really beef up with domestic connectivity and infrastructure. Most of the time aero bridges are not used when there are only two flights daily during the non-tourist season. However, having been a regular flyer from the airport, I always find the IndiGo ground staff at the airport to be one of the best I've come across. Super helpful. Md A — Google review I dont know what rules they follow out of no where..
The staffs are rude and arrogant, i dont know what kind of politeness and comfort they give to their customers..
I have been travelling for more than 20x time and each time i have suffered a lot and lot!! No one is kind and helpful, and are very unprofessional in behaviour.
Asking to bring out crocs ??? Seriously? Rules should be followed by all and everywhere equally . What comes u to make new rules.
Bodhgaya international airport have never given me pleasure and happy journey , in the month of may, AC arent working , no proper ac , its hot and sweating!!! This is what we pay for?? Aastha S — Google review I like the monastic exterior. Not much else to report from my 10 minutes near the luggage belt there. It’s the average small town airport. Ameeshi — Google review Gaya International Airport offers travelers a seamless experience with its tight security measures, ensuring peace of mind for passengers. The cleanliness of the facilities is commendable, reflecting the airport's commitment to hygiene and comfort. Staff members are consistently helpful, providing assistance and guidance whenever needed, which enhances the overall efficiency of the airport operations. The airport's layout is well-designed, making navigation easy for travelers, whether they are arriving, departing, or in transit. Additionally, Gaya International Airport's amenities cater to the diverse needs of passengers, ranging from dining options to duty-free shopping, enhancing the overall travel experience. Overall, Gaya International Airport stands out as a top choice for travelers seeking a hassle-free journey, thanks to its tight security, cleanliness, and helpful staff. Deepak G — Google review Average, waiting for modernisation, peaceful atmosphere, when landed was very cloudy, then rain started, staffs were supportive and quick to help, Thanks 🙏 PRASENJIT P — Google review Clean and hygiene airport environment. Staff are very friendly and helpful. Divya — Google review 4.3 (1052) • Falgu Rubber Dam, located on the Falgu River in Bodh Gaya, is a remarkable structure and a popular recreational destination. It offers a tranquil setting for picnics and leisure activities amidst lush greenery. Costing Rs 312 crore to build, this environmentally friendly dam uses rubber instead of concrete and spans 411 meters with six spans of 60-65 meters each. One of the places to visit in Gaya is Rubber Dam where people come to visit and cleanliness is taken care of here. The Falgu River Rubber Dam in Gaya, Bihar, is India’s first rubber dam and an important development for the region. It was built to ensure a steady water flow in the river, which is especially significant for pilgrims visiting the Vishnupad Temple. The continuous water supply adds to the spiritual experience of the visitors.
The dam is made of rubber and can be inflated or deflated depending on the water levels. This helps prevent flooding during heavy rains and ensures there is no water shortage during dry seasons. It has also improved irrigation in the area, benefiting local farmers and supporting agriculture.
Apart from its practical benefits, the dam has become an attraction for people interested in seeing modern technology at work. It highlights how infrastructure can be designed for sustainable development. However, regular maintenance is essential to keep it functioning properly, and any impact on aquatic life needs to be carefully monitored.
Overall, the Falgu River Rubber Dam is a great example of how innovative solutions can address multiple challenges. It not only supports religious tourism but also helps the local economy and sets an example for similar projects in other parts of the country. Abhishek V — Google review Rubber dam a innovative thought. Of its two sides, one is clean reserve water and the other side is drain sweage water from Gaya city.
People who lack common sense throw plastic garbage in water, thinking it's home backward. Admin should be strict in this regard. Can be developed as tourist hotspot with implementing more attraction. Amit K — Google review The Rubber Dam at night is a mesmerizing sight! The lights reflecting off the water create a serene and magical atmosphere. It’s a perfect spot for an evening stroll or spending quality time with loved ones. The sound of the flowing water combined with the cool breeze makes it a peaceful retreat. Highly recommended for anyone visiting the area—don’t miss the stunning night view Rounak R — Google review The Gaya Ji Dam, situated in the picturesque city of Gaya, Bihar, is an impressive example of engineering and natural beauty coming together. This dam plays a vital role in the region by serving as a water reservoir and a source of irrigation for the surrounding agricultural lands. It's not only a testament to human ingenuity but also a symbol of the harmonious coexistence of man and nature.
One of the most striking aspects of the Gaya Ji Dam is its scenic location. The dam is set against the backdrop of rolling hills, lush greenery, and the serene waters of the dam itself. This picturesque setting creates a tranquil and refreshing atmosphere, making it an ideal spot for nature enthusiasts and picnickers alike.
The dam structure itself is a marvel of engineering. Its primary purpose is to store water, which is essential for irrigation, especially in an agriculturally dominant region like Gaya. The dam's design is not only utilitarian but also aesthetically pleasing, with its clean lines and well-maintained infrastructure. The walls of the dam rise majestically, creating a sense of grandeur and stability.
Moreover, the dam's impact on the agricultural landscape of the region cannot be overstated. The water stored in the dam provides a lifeline to local farmers, enabling them to cultivate their crops and support their livelihoods. The Gaya Ji Dam is, therefore, a crucial component of the local economy and sustenance of the population.
In conclusion, a visit to the Gaya Ji Dam is not only an opportunity to witness an impressive piece of infrastructure but also a chance to immerse oneself in the serene beauty of nature. The dam's significance in supporting local agriculture and its contribution to the overall well-being of the region cannot be ignored. Whether you're a nature enthusiast, an admirer of engineering feats, or simply seeking a peaceful getaway, the Gaya Ji Dam in Gaya, Bihar, is a place that deserves your attention and admiration. Your visit to this amazing location must have left you with lasting memories of the natural and man-made wonders it presents. Jems P — Google review Very beautiful Falgu Rubber Dam Indian first largest Rubber Dam. Mohammad I — Google review Asia's longest rubber dam. Made across Falgu river just beside the fabled Vishnu Pad temple. Great lightings and a long and clean area to walk beside the river.
Sita Kund is just beside the dam.
A bit crowded on weekends or holidays. Vigyan P — Google review 6th June 2023 - I visited this place in the summer season and I recommend you to come in the rain season because if you visit here in summer you will not get the water of the falgu river. I recommend you to come in the evening or at night. Good initiative by Bihar government but due to illiteracy you will see spit of paan and gutkha everywhere (पान और गुटखा थूका हुआ।). The government had invested a lot of money in creating this dam but they are not invested in anything in repairing and maintenance. You will see spider webs and a lot of dirt here. The Falgu river also lost their sand. You will see clay everywhere. There was no water in the dam. The river was completely dry. I request the government to take action and save their good efforts. You can chill out here in the morning or in the evening at the time of the rainy season. You will get attractive lighting at night. Uttam S — Google review 4.1 (169) • Playground Park Park &amp; ride Gandhi Maidan in Gaya, named after Mahatma Gandhi, offers a serene public space adorned with lush greenery. The park is perfect for outdoor activities like walking, running, and cycling. It features a children's park and exercise equipment. This sprawling area hosts various events such as exhibitions and fairs for the community and students. Additionally, it serves as the venue for Pitripaksh Mela and health camps. Gandhi Maidan in Gaya is a serene and good public park that offers a peaceful environment for locals and visitors alike. It's a great place for morning walks, jogging, and recreational activities, surrounded by lush greenery. The spacious grounds are perfect for families and children to relax and enjoy some fresh air. However, at times, the park could benefit from more cleanliness and better maintenance of public amenities. Overall, it's a pleasant spot for relaxation and community gatherings, but with some improvements, it could be an even better attraction for the people of Gaya.❣️❣️ Gandhi Maidan Gaya is located 1.5 km from Gaya Junction and 2 km before Sri Vishnupad Temple which is very big field and Stadium 🏟 I stayed here during pitru Paksha Mela in 2024. Naveen K — Google review Went during Chhath puja for fruit 🍇 market…. Whole place was full of trucks 🚛 and lorries 🚛 in unsynchronised way…..
All fruit vendors were there…. All types of fruits were available…. Lots of dust which was expected… little coordination in parking and traffic is needed for smooth transport movement Vishwa D — Google review It is a beautiful place with lot of open space. It is surrounded by green trees and plants. We can easily see the beautiful sunrise and sunset from here. It's a good and safe place to catchup with friends and families. Refreshing environment. Less crowded. A quite place in the whole city where you can relax in peace. Atul K — Google review Gandhi mandap is inside Gandhi Maidan .It is a publuc place and being used for different purposes like small meeting ,some people's are using the place for time passing.It is protected by boundry and having sitting arrangement inside boundry.Some plantation is done inside the boundry.But who is taking care of mandap in night is not clear.In morning it is using for yoga and light exercise etc.It is a good place for morning yoga etc. Janardan K — Google review Nice place for morning - evening walk, good place for playing games, for fairs like book fair, handicraft fair etc.. Pooja K — Google review Nice place here park, cool surrounding, Every year Disneyland fair, Books fair etc. Hardeek R — Google review Nice ground for running 400 metre in 1 round Gaurav R — Google review I'll never travel to Gaya without this trip planner again 4.6 (128) • Shri Markandey Mahadev Mandir is a revered Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Shiva, known for its intricate architecture and religious significance. The temple, one of the oldest in Gaya, attracts pilgrims who seek divine blessings and participate in religious ceremonies. Located on the congested Gaya Bodhgaya road, it offers a peaceful and spiritual ambiance for worshipers. Spritual place dedicated to Mahadev 🏰It's a Shiv temple situated 80 meters north of Bypass Gaya.
🏰Its premises are big enough but it needs cleaning.
🏰Prefer Monday to visit here. Dhanraj K — Google review This is also one of oldest temple in Gaya.
Located in congested area. Govt can plan for cable car for tourist and visitor. that cable car should connect all th